#### Directional Derivatives

Recall that the partial derivative of a function represents the rates of change in whichever direction the derivative gives respect to (x or y or z axes).

However, this does not allow us to see the rate of change in the direction of an arbitrary vector of our choice. 
In order to do this, we start with a vector $u=<a,b>$, a surface $S$ with equation $z=f(x,y)$, a point $P(x_{0},y_{0},z_{0})$, and the equation $z_{0}=f(x_{0},y_{0})$. If we have a plane that passes through the point $P$ in the direction of $u$, it will make a curve $C$ that intersects with the surface $S$. If we find the tangent line $T$ to $C$, we will have found the rate of change of $f$ at point $P$ in the direction of $u$. This is this the **directional derivative** of $f$ at point $P$ in the direction of $u$.
$$D_{u}f(x,y)=f_{x}(x,y)a+f_{y}(x,y)b$$
#### The Gradient Vector
We can note from the previous example that the directional derivative formula can be represented by the dot product of the vector of the two partial derivatives and the $u$ vector. $$D_{u}f(x,y)=<f_{x}(x,y),f_{y}(x,y)>*<a,b>$$
The first vector given in this equation is known as the **gradient vector**. A function of $n$ variables will have a gradient vector with $n$ number of components, each being the partial derivative of the $n$th variable.
$$\nabla f(x,y)=<f_{x}(x,y),f_{y}(x,y)>$$

Examples:
Find the directional derivative of the function $f(x,y)=x^2y^3-4y$ at the point $(2,-1)$ in the direction of the vector $v=2i+5j$.
First, we must find the gradient vector at (2,-1). $$f_{x}(x,y)=2y^3x \space |\space f_{y}(x,y)=3x^2y^2-4$$

$$\nabla x=<2y^3x,3x^2y^2-4>$$
$$\nabla x=<2(-1)^3(2),3(2)^2(-1)^2-4>$$
$$\nabla x=<-4,8>$$
Then we have to change the direction vector to a unit vector to ensure it solely represents direction.
$$u=\frac{v}{|v|}=<\left( \frac{2}{\sqrt{ 29 }} \right),\left( \frac{5}{\sqrt{ 29 }} \right)>$$

Now we can compute the dot product of this with the direction vector (apparently the direction vector has to be a unit vector). $$
\boxed{\nabla x= \left( -\frac{8}{\sqrt{ 29 }} \right)+\left( \frac{40}{\sqrt{ 29 }} \right)=\frac{32}{\sqrt{ 29 }}}
$$
Example in 3 variables: If $f(x,y,z)=x\sin yz$, (a) find the gradient of $f$ and $b$ find the directional derivative of $f$ at $(1,3,0)$ in the direction of $v=<1,2,-1>$.
First, we will find the gradient of $f$. $$f_{x}(x,y,z)=\sin yz$$
$$f_{y}(x,y,z)=xz\cos(yz)$$
$$f_{z}(x,y,z)=xy\cos(yz)$$
$$\nabla f=<\sin yz,xz\cos(yz),xy\cos(yz)>$$
Then, we have to find the gradient vector at $(1,3,0)$.
$$\nabla f=<\sin 0,0,3\cos(0)>=<0,0,3>$$
Then, we must find the unit directional vector. $$u=\frac{v}{|v|}=\frac{1}{\sqrt{ 6 }}i+\frac{2}{\sqrt{ 6 }}j-\frac{1}{\sqrt{ 6 }}k$$
Finally, we can find the dot product.
$$\nabla x*u=0+0-\frac{3}{\sqrt{ 6 }}$$

$$$$
